# LocalSummerTemperatureDynamics-IJF

## Reproducibility package

This repository reproduces the results, figures and tables reported in 

Gioia, V., Di Credico, G., and Pauli, F.
*Local Summer Temperature Dynamics: Bayesian Markov-Switching to Forecast Annual Frequency and Duration of Heat Waves*
submitted to the International Journal of Forecasting. 

Summer temperatures may exhibit prolonged periods of extremely high temperatures, informally referred to as heat waves. Operative definitions entail temperature abnormality, persistence over time, and, possibly, impact on ecosystems and human life.  Historical episodes and stochastic patterns of heat waves can be described upon adopting a specific definition using observed temperature data. Atmosphere and local conditions may affect the variability of the phenomenon, making the study and prediction of temperature dynamics and heat waves complex. Hence, the proposal of a dynamic hidden Markov model, which incorporates natural seasonality and a large-scale climate index along with tail modelling, to explore the annual distribution of heat wave metrics. Different classification methods for describing and forecasting heat wave periods are considered. The proposal is illustrated using the local maximum daily temperatures of two geographically close and heterogeneous locations of the Italian region Friuli Venezia Giulia.

First package version: Feb 1, 2025

Last update: March 13, 2026

### Contacts
 - Vincenzo Gioia, University of Trieste
   vincenzo.gioia@units.it
 - Gioia Di Credico, University of Trieste
   gioia.dicredico@deams.units.it
 - Francesco Pauli, University of Trieste
   francesco.pauli@deams.units.it

## Software Environment 

   Operating systems tested: macOS (Apple M1 Pro, 16GB RAM) and Windows (11)

  All file paths are relative to the root of the package. Please set your working directory accordingly, or open the `CodeGitHub.Rproj` file using RStudio.

### `rstan`
The package `rstan` requires a working C++ toolchain: 
  
    - Windows users must install Rtools; 
    - macOS users must install Xcode Command Line Tools.

These tools must be installed before running `renv::restore()`.


### `renv`

This repository uses the `renv` package to manage the R package environment. 

The file `renv.lock` records the exact versions of all R packages tested in the project.

To recreate the same software environment, run the following commands from a clean R session and with the working directory set to the main repository folder:

```
# install.packages("renv")
renv::activate()
renv::restore() # install dependencies
```

The command `renv::restore()` will automatically install the package versions specified in `renv.lock`.
After restoring the environment, the scripts can be executed following the steps described in the [Reproducing the Results](#reproducing-the-results) section below.

    

## Repository Structure

The repository is organized as follows:

```
Code/
│
├── 1_FitStan.R
├── 2_HWrResults.R
├── 2_ModelResults.R
├── 3_Fig2.R
├── 3_Fig3-S7.R
├── 3_Fig4-5-S8-S9-S10-S11.R
├── 3_FigS1-S4-S5-S6.R
├── 3_Tab1-T2.R
├── 3_TabT1_FigS2-S3.R
├── CodeGitHub.Rproj
├── data/                   # Input datasets
│   ├── dataFVG/            
│      ├── dati_ALLCapriva.Rdata    # Capriva data from 01/01/1995 to 31/12/2024 and GST
│      ├── dati_ALLTrieste.Rdata    # Trieste data from 01/01/1995 to 31/12/2024 and GST
│      ├── datiCapriva.Rdata        # Capriva data from 01/05/1995 to 30/09/2024 and GST
│      └── datiTrieste.Rdata        # Trieste data from 01/05/1995 to 30/09/2024 and GST
│
├── ExtractedResults/       # Posterior quantities generated by 2_ModelResults.R
├── functions/              # Custom R functions
│   ├── fitSTAN.R             # Functions to build the Stan models and related quantities
│   ├── ExtractPosterior.R    # Functions to extract posterior quantities 
│   └── load_Packages.R       # Load needed packages
│
├── HeatwaveR/              # Empirical quantile-based approach results generated by 2_HWrResults.R
├── Plots/                  # All figures generated by 3_[***].R
├── renv/                   # All figures generated by 3_[***].R
├── renv.lock               # List of dependencies
└── ResultsGST/             # Fitted Stan models generated by 1_FitStan.R
```

## Data Description

All datasets required to reproduce the results are included in the repository in the `data/` folder.
All datasets are fully sharable and included in .RData format.

### Input Data

The response variable (y) is the maximum daily temperatures from May to September, spanning 1995 - 2024, of the stations Trieste and Capriva. 
The data are extracted from the regional environmental protection agency (ARPA, https://www.arpa.fvg.it/) of the Italian region Friuli Venezia Giulia. 
Each dataset also reports the Global Surface Temperature anomaly index (GST), with reference period 1951-1980, and using an interim estimate for 2024, as extracted from [Rohde and Hausfather (2020)](https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-12-3469-2020).

Some daily missing values (2 for Capriva and 20 for Trieste) are handled using simple imputation rules. 

### Intermediary Data

Results used in the paper are included in the repository to facilitate reproducibility 
of the figures and tables without re-running the full MCMC estimation

 - `ExtractedResults/` contains posterior quantities derived from the fitted models running `2_ModelResults.R`
 - `HeatwaveR/` contains the results of the empirical quantile-based approach running `2_HWrResults.R`


## Reproducing the Results

Please note that the repository has been tested from a clean R session using the environment specified in `renv.lock`.

  1. Set the working directory to the `Code` folder or open the `CodeGitHub.Rproj` file using RStudio
  2. To reproduce the analysis using the last tested package versions, set the `renv` package as described in the [Software Environment](#software-environment) section
  3. Run the following scripts in order

      - `1_FitStan.R`: fits all the models used in the paper. Fitted models are saved in the folder `ResultsGST/`. Each fitted model is saved as a `.RData` file with size between 700 MB and 1.4 GB, depending on the number of states
      - `2_HWrResults.R`: generates the results of the empirical quantile-based approach. Results are saved in the folder `HeatwaveR/`. We included HWr results used in the paper, if the file `2_HWrResults.R` is executed, files will be overwritten.
      - `2_ModelResults.R`: all MCMC models must be fitted before running this script. This script generates the posterior quantities needed for the results in Section 3.2 (LOOIC), Section 3.3 (estimated filtered probabilities; periods classified as heat waves for 2018; simulated temperature trajectories for 2024 and estimated mean effects for all the regimes; simulated regimes for the in-sample and out-of-sample generated trajectories, needed for extracting the predicted heat wave metrics) and all the results in Supplementary Material (e.g., differences in elpd reported in Table T2 of the Supplementary Material).  Results are saved in the folder `ExtractedResults/`. We included MCMC model results used in the paper, to reproduce the analysis without running all the models. If the file `2_ModelResults.R` is executed, files will be overwritten.
      - `3_Fig2.R`: reproduces Figure 2 of the paper. Figures are saved in the folder `Plots/`
      - `3_Fig3-S7.R`: reproduces Figure 3 of the paper and Figure S7 of the Supplementary Material Figures are saved in the folder `Plots/`
      - `3_Fig4-5-S9-S11.R`: reproduces all the boxplots reported; namely, Figures 4-5 of the paper and Figures S9 - S11 of the Supplementary Material. Figures are saved in the folder `Plots/`
      - `3_SM_Results.R`: contains the code for obtaining some of the results reported in the Supplementary Material, in particular Figures S1 - S7, and Table T1. Figures are saved in the folder `Plots/` and intermediary data in the folder `ExtractedResults/`

### Computational time

For 2000 MCMC iterations per model (parallel computing using 4 cores):
  - on macOS (Apple M1 Pro, 16 GB RAM): approximately 6–30 minutes, depending on the number of regimes
  - on Windows systems: may require several hours
    
To ensures reproducibility of MCMC initialization, a seed is set in file `functions/fitSTAN.R` (line 295).
We report (commented) the seeds used for trajectories selection on: i) `2_ModelResults.R` line 23, ii) `3_Fig3-S7.R` line 15, and iii)  `3_Fig4-5-S8-S9-S10-S11.R` line 32.

Minor differences across operating systems may arise due to parallelization and numerical precision but should not affect substantive results. 

### License

The code in this reproducibility package is released under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3).
You may redistribute and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL-3 as published by the Free Software Foundation.
The datasets included in this repository are redistributed for academic reproducibility purposes.
Users are responsible for complying with the original data provider’s terms of use.

